Minutes.
I use that time's up to you,
but if you'd like questions, I suggest you, um,
give yourself some time at the end for those questions.
You, you have my submission in front of you? Yes, we do.
So I'll go through it reasonably quickly. Brilliant.
With a few war stories so that, uh,
you get a bit of an idea where we're at. Yeah.
Yeah. Good morning.
Thanks for the opportunity for coming,
uh, for us to be here.
I'm Andy Warren from Bloom, New Zealand Limited,
and I have got my colleagues, Louisa Vandenberg,
who I've worked with for 25 years, been right
around the world on many a mission
and Chris Claridge, who is well known on
the horticultural industry.
We also represent the New Zealand Fruit
Tree Importers Group.
We are the convener of that, which is a group of corporates
who are the key importers in New Zealand.
There's only about seven importers in the actual whole
live plant industry.
So we've been actively campaigning for complete overhaul
of the light plant import regulations
and system for about 10 years.
So what we ask here today,
and the key questions are an independent review in order
to the proposed plant health environment capability
facility, and the associated plant import process to be
co governed by the actual users of the facilities,
which is us as importers.
Secondly, an examination of an alternative business model
for live plant importing and diagnostic testing.
And the third thing is the import processes designed,
monitored, and managed in collaboration
with actual importers as opposed to anybody else.
So who are we? We, I've been personally importing
and exporting live plants for over 40 years,
and during that time, I've witnessed the degradation
of NPI services more recently due to an erosion
of technical capability and capacity,
and a very high turnover of staff
demonstrating a significant loss of institutional knowledge.
And that's a pretty critical issue.
We've got support today from key drives, including 85%
of the, at least 85% of the Apple industry exports,
including New Zealand Fruit Tree Company,
the largest importer in New Zealand,
the Yummy Fruit Company, poor painter, market gardeners,
fresh Max Fruit Craft, that's the Bostock Group, Mr.
Apple Craigmore Investments, FreshCo Southern Produce,
New Zealand, China Fruit Company,
and the largest citrus operator in New Zealand
who do about 50% of export first fresh.
We've also the support of the actual facilitator
of NPIs import reform workshops,
professor Hamish Gar from Lincoln University.
Our concerns, we have 12 key points that we wish to present.
Even one of them would be enough to suggest
to MPI that we need to review
and look at this whole process.
First point is imports are currently largely frozen,
and, uh, we note that 85%
of new plant right variety rights are from
offshore breeding.
So the importance of in import cannot be underestimated.
It's simply unaffordable.
Two, less than 50% of the available MPIL three B
post entry quarantine space is currently being utilized.
And that's likely to go down as we use up the old, uh,
charging areas that may get down to as low as 30%
three NPIs plant quarantine facility charges
are at least three times
more than any other equivalent facility around the world.
Four over 1000 import health standards have
just been suspended.
MPI had not completed one new live plant import health
standard in the past 18 months, despite many requests,
we still don't have an import health standard for pears,
apple, and pears for over 26 years,
despite many requests.
And the root stock that goes with that.
This is a huge issue for our premier apple
and peer breeding organization.
Prevar up in Hawkes Bay. Paul will talk about that five.
The IHS review,
that's the import health standard review process,
needs review and radical change.
I think MPI actually agree with that.
Given a thousand standards have been suspended,
and it's taking MPI somewhere between 8,000
and 15,000 man hours
or woman hours to do one live plant
in import health standard, we've gotta look at a change.
And that's why in 0.6, we proposed the use of
AI using an ontological database, uh, arrangement.
This has already been done in Australia,
and that's why we're suggesting we need
to look at other countries to do that rather than trying
to develop it ourselves.
Seven, there's insufficient recognition
of offshore clean plant facilities.
There's about eight, which are the source of most of the new
varieties for new crops in New Zealand.
Ke fruit, apples, stone fruit, citrus, avocados, all
that kind of thing, and all the testing that's done
by them offshore.
So the point is to get it done before it even gets here.
For example, nack tobo in Netherlands has only three
of the 30 tests required for prunus recognized by MPI.
So there's consequently massive duplication
and a big cost to industry, something Mr.
Hoard was quite concerned about.
So number eight, there is no evidence
of growth in diagnostic testing demand and like,
and unlikely to be any increase in surveillance testing
unless more budget is put together for associated.
So, uh, surveillance programs,
we see none of that at this point.
Nine MPI have spent over the last five years,
$102 million on planning, designing
and developing a business case
for the PHCC project in Mount Albert
and projecting a total cost of between 500 million
and a billion dollars.
By the way, there's been four separate design
efforts on that already.
So we are, we are really concerned about the institutional
knowledge issue there.
We would just keep on going round and round 10.
The business case for PHCC was written without industry
collaboration and the projected cost is up
to a hundred times more than a privately designed testing
facility with cutting edge testing
and diagnostic capability.
11. There, there's been an exponential change,
and I mean, a totally rapid change in testing
and PE deduction methodologies in the last five
or six years since that 2019 start to that project.
So things have changed markedly.
We've been through COVID, um,
and this is eclipsed their approach to risk management
to the extent that NPIs testing charges now are in excess
of 15 times,
and I say 15 times what a private
facility would charge.
And we've put together a very, um,
complex appendix, um, which Mr.
Claridge can speak to.
We've provided a full cost of testing model by a third party
and a direct comparison using cherries as an example.
So in the case of cherries, MPI $20,000
and now new approach academically endorse
and biosecurity security, Safeway $1,500.
So you can see there's a massive change in costs
that we've come up with.
And 12 as recently of last month, NPR are proposing
to increase the cost of their services, 300% increase to
certification fees alone due to a historic deficit.
So therefore, to be blunt,
we have no confidence in NPIs ability
to restrain costs over time.
The questions that need answering
why has MPI ignored the 12 points we have raised.
They cannot be unaware of them.
The formal live plant import pathway
have actually proved incredibly safe.
We haven't had an in, uh, an incursion in 30 years.
And the big risks right now,
and you'll hear it in the paper all the time,
are from freight, e-commerce, passengers,
and dare I say, it's smuggling.
And we can prove
that we've notified NPI on numerous times about potential
smuggling because when things get too expensive
and too difficult, people tend
to put things in their gumbo and bring them in.
And we can quote you that we know about it.
So why aren't these a priority?
Why have MPI failed to engage
with users in the consultation process.
When we went up there one time, they thought
that the scientists at PHEL were the users,
not actually industry.
So there's a bit of an issue there.
So the recent import reform workshops are an example
of NPIs poor engagement with stakeholders.
The issues are already in well known with similar
exercises conducted repeatedly over the last 10 years.
So why we asked, do we not build a collaborative model
of testing with other providers?
So Andy, you're coming up to nine minutes now.
You want, you're coming up to nine minutes. Yep.
No, I'm of your I'm in time. Yeah.
So testing and diagnostics,
there have been already exponential
changes in methodologies.
Gene sequencing is no longer limited to viruses,
and we can do a lot of other things.
So we have no confidence in the outdated design of PHEC.
There are at least seven companies in China
producing these new machines that do this job.
And this has all come out of COVID testing
where COVID tests now have got down to as low as 15 cents.
So you're testing a virus, same as a human virus.
It's pretty cheap. So the volume of testing done
by MPI hasn't changed in five years.
It's still, when we've done an analysis
of this a hundred thousand tests a year,
that has not changed.
So we're quite concerned that they're reporting, oh,
we need a lot of surge capacity and all this sort of thing.
The actual figures don't represent that
a medium sized gene sequencing machine can do 500,000
tests a year, and you're talking of less than $20 million
for that specific machine.
So, such testing could be done
by a private provider in New Zealand that 15 times cheaper
than what MPI is currently charging.
For example, we've just had something go through,
we were charged $850 plus GST per sample
for cherry testing in our model, we can do the same testing
for $35.
And this has largely been enabled by the explosion
of cheap testing, as I suggested
before from China post COVID.
There are other tools that can help detect
and identify high priority pests.
These are being regularly used overseas,
especially in the Netherlands,
the world's second largest agricultural exporter
and a lot of other countries.
So in conclusion, we've now reached a view
that MPI has an agenda of maintaining a monopolistic control
of plant imports
and testing under the guise of biosecurity, regardless
of the evidence presented.
MPIs, the regulator, funder,
and monopoly service provider for the HT sector
industry has no mechanism to hold NPI to account
apart from us in front
of literally your select committee today.
So we conclude that the PHCC project in Auckland is
not commercially viable.
And NPI now in serious danger of developing a facility,
which will be redundant by the time it opens in 29 30,
look at ville that was three years behind
and 30% over budget.
So, um, and we see it as irresponsible
and a significant waste of taxpayer funds in a time
of fiscal restraint.
So in short, the passage of time since inception,
it could probably only be described as a vanity project.
People tend to hold onto things.
The facility itself will not increase exports.
We propose a pause
and proceedings like the Cook State Fer project
to re-scope the project in consideration
of an alternative public private partnership
with a revamp laboratory plan
and PEQ facility that, that uses established
offshore design and builds a system,
not like the bespoke system
that was used in the interim arrangement,
which quite frankly is not too good to look at. I'm gonna,
I'm gonna stop you there and go to questions
because we're running outta time. So Mike,
Um, thanks Jeff.
Um, just a question for you, Annie.
What's the impact of the delays, the suspensions, um,
of your import health standards?
What's that mean? Well,
You, you could probably measure the impact in billions
of dollars to the extent
that new varieties are not coming in,
and Paul Painter is gonna talk a lot about
that on the effect of actual, um, for growers
and marketers in the industry.
So you're talking of billions of dollars, us,
Sam, Sam, Steve, then Mark,
I note, note your point about, um,
the Fed project not being commercially viable
and being very expensive and potentially irrelevant.
Um, so thank you for sharing those thoughts,
but just wanted to ask you, who are the stakeholders
of the Fed project and
how much engagement has there been with bi?
Okay. The actual stakeholders are the importers.
There's about nine sectors in agriculture, um,
for high value, starting with apples, stone fruit, citrus,
avocados, all the berry crops, potatoes, that kind
of thing.
And those are the stakeholders.
There's actually about seven regular importers.
So they're the stakeholders, not PHEL.
Okay. Yep. How much engagement does it
and how much engagement we've had very little.
We've had two one hour teams meetings,
and they did ask Lloyd and I to go
and have a review of their interim facility
and we wrote them a report
and we went to impress it was non-sustainable. Right.
Yeah. Could I ask a, so very close up.
And, and on the back of that, those two hours,
those teams meetings,
I assume you gave them similar feedback to
what she was today.
Absolutely. We, we fed this back regularly
and, um, I, I know that Stuart Anderson wrote you a letter,
um, here, um,
and which was in response to questions posed
by us to this committee.
Thanks, Steve. And the points we've raised are absolutely
factual backed by data
and figures such as the alternative pricing
model that we put in.
Yes. Appendix one. Yep.
Yep. Alright, Steve, so is there a risk
that here we have a facility that we're,
we've been locked into the PHEC facility that is now
'cause of the evolution of technology, as you say,
redundant, and that we as a parliament need
to reevaluate the wisdom of that investment?
I think you've hit the nail on the head. I understand.
The point is there's been a massive
exponential change in testing methodology since 2019
or so when this whole thing was moed.
Uh, Chris could possibly comment on that. So
Gene sequencing has rapidly evolved since COVID testing,
uh, the seven suppliers of the equipment out of China.
Currently, NPI is sending samples to China
to undertake gene sequencing.
There is gene sequencing machine sitting on LIC Fonterra AG
Research and Lincoln, there's sitting idle faster.
That gene sequencing machine in Lincoln University
was half a million dollars.
It could run all of the tests.
100,000 tests using five staff now.
So something's been disconnected.
The suppliers of the equipment have not been made
contact by NPI.
No one in the industry has had any engagement
through any of the business cases.
So everyone's looking at this slightly scans going,
what has happened here?
It's a disconnect. Yeah.
And the sub would be, um, is it a problem of the inertia
of the ministry that they're locked into this project
instead of hell bent on completing it?
And, and so there's, it's very difficult for them
to hear your message that it's already outta date.
Absence of capability of capacity of the understanding
of technology management at the highest levels, high tune
of technical staff, inability to retain skilled staff.
Yep. So you've got
and four separate business cases, none
of which we've been able to get hold of.
We don't know actually what they've done in their analysis
and the scope of it.
Yeah. That's why we're saying stop.
Let's go back and have another look at this
before we spend a billion dollars
because we could build a hundred
of these facilities in New Zealand to give you some idea
of the disconnect given the new technology,
the experts in New Zealand on technology testing machines
have not been consulted by NPI.
Okay. We've got a final question from Mark.
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Um, um,
Andrew, good to see you online.
Um, and apologies for my absence. Your detractors, sir.
Your detractors would turn around
and say that you are one
of the larger players in the industry,
and by virtue you stand to gain the best, um,
advantage as it were.
Um, in terms of reduction of levies
and costs to your enterprise.
How do you square that, given that you are being very, very,
um, objectively critical of MPI?
Because that's what people will say. How do you square that,
Mark? Thanks
for your question. Good question.
I think the facts are, we are a facilitator only.
So in the actual, uh, benefit that we make out
of it is quite minimal compared
with the benefit to industry.
We are just simply the messenger, the organ
through which this goes.
And on that basis, pulling together, uh,
this whole process, somebody had to do it.
And given the establishment
of our fruit tree importers group, um, over the last five
to six years, that's how we've done it.
And they've asked us to stand there for them.
I I can add another point to that.
The key issue here is to lower the barrier to entry. Mm-hmm.
If, if Blooms is looking to secure, uh,
a monopoly situation, they'd encourage the barrier
to go up, not down.
It would, it's so that argument doesn't wash.
Yeah. And it's an extremely complex, uh,
effort to bring in material.
We've done it for 10 years or so. Mm-hmm.
And there's probably not room given the fact there's only
seven importers, so for a whole heap
of other companies to be in there.
So our benefit is much more simply as a facilitator.
Have we got time for supplementary Mr? No,
We're well over time.
Sorry, mark. Uh, so thanks very much for your, um,
submission today.
Uh, uh, Andy
and team, um, we're gonna move on now to, uh, Paul Berry
and, um, his submissions.
But you're more than welcome to stay here and listen anyway.
Yeah, we have numerous appendices and worksheets.
Any other information should you require that? Thank you.
We've done a lot of research. Thank
You. So thanks for taking the,
making the effort. Thank you.
No, I appreciate the time.
So, uh, welcome Paul.
Um, we'll take it as that we've read your submission.
Um, you have, uh, 15 minutes, uh,
you use, that's up to you.
But I would suggest you leave some time for questions
because the committee's obviously quite interested.
So, uh, far away.
Thank you. Appreciate your time today.
And I know this is the engine room of parliament here,
and, uh, this is a great committee.
We sort of stalked you from afar and, uh, and, uh, uh,
and the rural community and this,
and we think this make this team's very good.
Um, so in fact, the rural community's favorite green mp, um,
and probably the rural community's favorite party Maori, um,
uh, it's, um, the, uh, so I'm, I suppose I'm here
to give a commercial perspective.
Yes. And, uh, it's important to understand there are a lot
of different biases based on where you are on the chain.
If you're a, a bureaucrat
or even an industry body, including our industry body,
the rights biosecurity after that, they put protect.
But the opportunity for plant to put pathways is, uh,
under thought about by NPI and the industry bodies
because they can see the
downsides of getting something wrong.
They can't see the opportunity to getting it right.
And that's particularly because of the lag.
Uh, quite oftentimes when we're reporting material,
I see a great nectarine in California now that'll take me 10
years, uh, to be in commercial production if I move
irresponsibly quickly.
If you, uh, if you test it a bit better
and we take, we're at the moment,
we are three years offshore quarantine, one year onshore,
and then we get a couple little sticks.
We have to bulk up the material, plant some test trees.
Most people would like to have
a look at that for a few years.
And so, uh, then the planted orchard,
you five years into production, your real benefits, uh,
once you get the material, uh, probably in the 10
to 20 year bracket.
And, uh, and you could probably add 10 years in, in testing
and bulking up, uh, and getting the, the propagation right.
And there's probably 10 years in terms of the importation
and, uh, and getting that right.
So it's a very, very long process from beginning to end.
Uh, so that takes any bias of it
because anything we bring in today, I'll be gone
by the time we are making money out of it.
So it really is about providing opportunity for the future.
Uh, and whatever decisions you make will have
a big impact on that.
And I wanna remember your name,
but it's important you get this right.
Um, so our business has been over its whole history based
on plant imports.
We have no, uh, credible
domestic stone fruit breeding program.
Well, I would say we are not providing leadership at any
breeding program whatsoever.
Um, probably kiwi fruit
and apples are in the leading echelon,
but, uh, certainly don't have the leadership
they probably had 20 years ago.
And there are a lot of industries that simply have nothing.
So there's huge amount of opportunity to bring material in
because New Zealand has to be in that premium space,
and we have to be presenting consumers,
which increasingly are Asian consumers with products
that really wow them.
And we are capable of doing that.
But we need the germ plasm perhaps,
to start breeding programs.
Uh, and we need to do good varieties of the material
that's gonna achieve those premium prices.
Uh, we're a commercial company,
but we invest in, uh,
two plant intellectual property, uh, companies.
We have a shareholding in them.
Uh, and we invest either directly
or indirectly into three breeding programs,
including one in France, of which I'm a director.
And, uh, and that's producing red fleshed apples,
and they're gonna change the world.
Uh, and we're really excited about it,
but it's a slow pathway getting them in and getting 'em up
and running and everybody else is making progress
and, and we are not.
So I guess in terms of getting the plant import pathways,
right, the best example we have of a similar country
that we share a lot of similar biosecurity values
with is Australia at Lum, which I think opened in 2015.
They went through about a decade long process
to develop their new quarantine system.
Uh, and it's basically the growers there are smiling from
ear to ear, uh,
because they've got a one year system
of bringing material in,
and they're certainly adopting more
progressive approach to technology.
And that's what's really changing some of the, uh,
new gene sequencing technologies.
You know, the human genome took 10 years to map,
and the machinery now can do it in a day.
So the technology's moving extremely fast.
I had a quick review of the literature on, um,
virus testing technology, uh, in the last few days.
And, uh, you know, in the last five years, the amount
of progress being made is enormous.
And so it's very important.
I think I've very rudely said in my thing that the, it looks
to me like NPIA building a tank in the age of drones.
And that's how quickly things are are changing.
And so we have to be, uh, pretty dynamic about it.
But the number one thing we can't afford
to have is the slowest
and most expensive pathway for fire imports.
We are totally committed to biosecurity.
I'm fearful every day
that some tourist is gonna bring in brown rated stink bugger
have a young son who's very enthusiastic beekeeper,
and he, um, he's, he's super hot on the hornet tissue.
Uh, doesn't think that necessarily was handled that well.
We are very aware of the risks.
Uh, NP often say, oh, you growers don't care.
I got more skin in the game than anybody else.
So we are very focused on biosecurity.
We have to get that right, but we have to balance
that with the opportunity.
And there are many more small sectors
with the costs of importation.
Also, the risk, uh, that material I bring out in California
for stone fruit, well, I don't import it,
but we, uh, we fund it
probably we have about a 10% success rate
of commercially uh, developing those varieties
because California doesn't have bacteria,
poly pseudomonas doesn't have mono linea particular brown
rock that we have different species.
I dunno what the rain is.
Uh, so, uh, when we bring it here,
we find it doesn't perform in our condition.
So there's a lot of things that get cast aside.
Uh, we are probably bringing more in from France,
and the primary reason from that is not better material,
but higher levels of success
because their climate's a little more similar.
So there are lots of industries
that can't even contemplate bringing things in.
In the very start, we did those import health standards
because, um, uh, Andy mentioned peers as a new peer in, uh,
in Europe with that trademarked Fred,
which is a very strange trademark, probably works in Europe.
It's actually quite a good peer.
I'm very impressed what you can buy on the supermarket
as patterns tri from the late 18 hundreds
and bur Bos from the early 18 hundreds.
So it's so far off the, off the pace
for 26 years, no new peers.
And there are things happening
around the world in that space.
And so all of these minor industries can't afford the plant,
uh, import pathways,
and they're kind of languishing on old material.
And so it's very important that we can, uh,
put New Zealand at in that premium space.
That Asian market is very desirous of high quality produce,
has a reverence for it.
There's nothing like you see in Germany, the one fill
of bags of apples for,
but the Asian consumer, they'll have,
they'll like a tradesmen in the craft beer aisle.
They'll, they're the drill times's ridiculous.
So we're looking at an apple five different directions
and taking a long time to buy it, and they'll take it back
and from the desk and people will pass by saying,
this is a beautiful thing you have on there,
a little discussion, very odd, uh, dynamic.
But boy, if the quality's 10% better over there,
they'll pay you another $10 a box.
It's 10% better in Europe, same price.
So we've got a gold mine, uh, on our doorstep,
and there's a lot of industries with counter seasonal, uh,
supply opportunities, but they don't have the ger plasm
to develop varieties here, all the new varieties themselves
to take to that market.
So we have to have, uh, a part import pathway
that takes advantage of the opportunity we need to lay down
for future iterations.
I went to Massey University there, uh, earth science
and, uh, agriculture awards last year,
and, um, I can tell you that the kids coming
through are frighteningly good.
Um, about 90% of the wards were won by young women,
and they had maturity and poise
and intelligence, uh, that, uh, I sort of remember, um,
them not speaking to people when I was 19.
But, um, they're amazing. They're so far advanced.
The future is these young women.
And I tried to employ one of them, um,
who I originally employed as a graduate,
and she said, no, thanks very much.
29 years old, uh,
being offered a six figure salary and went off to Australia.
But the talents there
and what we have to present is the opportunities.
A lot of our sectors old, the growers are old.
The material they're producing is not that exciting
for the international market, but the potential's huge.
But we have to get that part in pathway right,
uh, at the right price.
And I could argue there's a public good, uh, value in, in,
uh, assisting some industries to fund that pathway.
Thanks very much, Paul.
I I did appreciate your, um, written submission.
There were a couple of bits in there that made be laugh,
actually, particularly where you talked about, um, any,
you know, any fool can do it,
and you, um, then, uh, accounted yourself
as being overqualified in that area, so mm-hmm.
Um, but we'll go straight to questions and Steve's, uh,
Got some questions for You.
Yeah, I mean, your analogy that we are boarding a tank, uh,
when we're in the air drones, uh, seems a powerful one.
What are the actual risks in terms
of lowering the biosecurity standard if we have
multiple facilities doing testing at a much lower cost
and potentially therefore more, um, uh,
live matter coming into the country.
Do do you think that's a, a thing,
a question we need to be asking?
Is that an anxiety, that biosecurity point of view?
MPI would rightly have.
Um, yes, in part, I, I'm not, there's, there's a couple
of ways of handling that The offshore facilities, um,
that I've visited have been very professional
and obviously a larger scale
and doing many more tests than ours.
So I think they're very good people.
Um, couple of 'em have full and short and staff turnover
and things, which NPIs enjoyed is, uh,
what they've had at Prosser in the US as well.
They had a big, we that scandal a few years ago
where they couldn't find the data
and they weren't sure they'd done the tests.
Uh, that's really down to staff turnover, right?
Um, and, uh, that place hasn't been all that well run,
but it's also down to the fact we took about six years
to find there was a problem.
Uh, there was a, a, a policy in there, uh,
about annual desktop audits,
and important to have low level of audits right
through the system on a regular basis to ensure
that your counterparts,
if you are outsourcing, are doing the right job.
But I think that you certainly can drive out costs when you
go to facilities are doing tens of thousands
of tests over a, over a handful.
So it's a matter of what, what's better
to be done in New Zealand, and we definitely need a
quarantine service here, uh, performing a range of services
and what could be more efficiently outsourced
to credible organizations that we can manage, uh,
effectively from a far.
And so I think there's a, there's a balance in there,
but if I was NPI and,
and I was on that career, I would like a new building.
I'd like all the toys and I'd like to do it myself,
but, um, so it is does take a degree of humility to say,
Hey, the cheaper deal might be for us not to have
that capacity, but, but outsource it. Okay.
Thank you. Go to Mike and then Mark. Uh, thanks Marc.
I just had a question for you
around the ham quarantine station and open in 2015.
Has it always been one year quarantine? No.
From when it was open? So has
That changed since?
It changed, but that was a big change.
They had a similar system to us. Yep.
But they looked at their, they reviewed their risk.
One of the smart things they did for a lot
of products was they did a survey of pest and diseases
and found out that half the things they were looking
for had been in Australia
for 120 years and no one had noticed.
Uh, so that shortened the pest list, uh, which was helpful.
And then they incorporated technologies,
and some of those technologies weren't as proven
as they are now, but what they said was,
if you've got a range of forest statistic technologies
and you're only 99.8% sure, if you can layer some
of those on top of each other, you get a confidence level
that is, uh, is adequate.
So they've certainly taken a very progressive approach
and continue to do so.
And it's just a matter of, I mean,
they've got some advantages.
My partners at Montagues over there, uh, grilling from ear
to ear, and they're gonna beat me to market,
and I get a bit upset about that.
Uh, but they, they certainly seem
to have been reasonably successful,
but they've laid a lot of mistakes, uh, in that facility.
And if we could look at what they've done in terms
of process and find out with bit honesty
what their mistakes have been,
we can do even better than, than they have done.
So I think there's, um, yeah, there's an opportunity
to learn from what's happened offshore.
Uh, Canada's gone through a process as well.
There's been a number of countries do things.
So a review of how they're incorporating technology
or how they intend to incorporate it as it develops, uh,
is, is pretty important.
Okay. Mark,
Mr. Chair, thank you for
so much, Paul. Good to see you.
Um, trying to square, um, your remarks in
and around NPI, um, and formally the remarks of Andy Warren.
What do you think is going on in NPI Do you think they've
got operational hubris
and they don't listen too, the industry players?
Uh, do you think there's a case of that and,
and if you are king for day, um,
what do you think should be the way forward?
The, the facility is disbanded
and we privatize, um, the, the type
of technology moving forward that would be required for
biosecurity protocols to a greater degree.
Uh, I think any large centralized organization, uh,
is inclined to a bit of hubris.
Uh, and that's not confined to government entities.
I think industry bodies SPR and now
and again, uh, that can happen.
Um, and it does take a lot of humility to,
to break out of that for sure.
Um, but yeah, I don't wanna be king for a day.
Uh, they've got a job to do,
but it's just a matter of, of approaching it with humility
and a very progressive mindset, and also connecting
and engaging with the industries in terms of, uh,
the opportunity provides them.
And one of the challenges I've got is to start talking
to h research and, uh, to, um, to, uh, HNZ and,
and Apple peers and Sun Fruit New Zealand about this
because the people we used to employ as CEOs and, and, uh,
and you know, chairman things used to be, uh,
industry people or former growers,
and they now tend to be more, um, you know, career, uh,
managers and, uh,
they don't really understand the commercial
opportunities as well as they should.
So I've got a job to do in lobbying them for sure.
Interesting observation. Thank you.
Um, oh, I have a question actually.
Um, so has there been any time
where you felt the system in New Zealand worked better than
what you, um, see it working now?
Well, I, I think we were, we were probably had the,
the system was more appropriate from a global perspective 20
years ago than it is now.
I think that the big changes are changes in technology
and, uh, and I think that we have
to avoid building a grand edifice with
that backward looking mindset
and think about how we can skin this one
most efficiently deliver outcomes for industries as well
as delivering biosecurity.
So, you know, I'm not sure, um, I probably didn't understand
as clearly as I do now, what they're doing 20 years ago.
I think the, the confidence amongst plant importers, uh,
and the costs, uh, the confidence has gone down
and probably the costs have gone up a lot.
And now, um, when you look at it with regard to, uh,
importing plant material, the quarantine costs
and, uh, the propagation and,
and, uh, you know, nothing out how to grow it costs.
And then they want you to get a PVR on the fees
for that are going through the roof.
Uh, so, you know, per variety now, um, you know,
probably it's getting up towards a hundred thousand dollars
for the total cost of, of bringing in, uh,
material offshore per variety.
Uh, so if you've got a 10% chance
of success outta California, it's huge disincentive
to bring things in, particularly small industries
where the levy players are saying,
so the benefits are gonna be 20 years down the track,
but I'm 63, I don't wanna fund this.
So we've got some real challenges, uh, on that cost side,
um, and how we actually fund and make these things happen.
'cause I think without some change to our approach,
you're gonna see those minor sectors.
And I've mentioned, uh, whether and perman, uh, weather
and die because they're just old hat
and they're not going anywhere.
And so you're gonna see the, the big industries can, I mean,
can afford to do this and they'll be added all day
long to stay ahead.
Uh, but the smaller sectors,
they just don't have the vision or the capacity.
Uh, there are no young people studying perman and,
and their master's degree.
Uh, and so you start, you start losing momentum. Mm.
And I think there's a lot of opportunity
for small sectors off a low base to have, uh,
spectacular growth.
Um, but there's nobody really driving that.
They lack, uh, industry body leadership and funding.
And there's just a small, small group
of people trying to get ahead.
So it's a real challenge for horticulture New Zealand
and indeed government policy about
how we provide an environment
that can enable those small sectors to prosper.
'cause someone could have put a, put a knot on easily
two Ns, on probably three Ns on maybe.
Uh, and, uh, and
that's what's gonna drive New Zealand in the future.
Well, thanks very much, Paul.
I really appreciated, um, both the written and,
and your oral presentation.
Um, and, uh, thanks. Yeah.
Um, unfortunately at times come to an end,
but, um, the committee will, um,
have some discussions about where we go from here.
Thank you. Appreciate It. Thank you.
Uh, welcome, uh, team.
So, uh, thanks for, uh, taking the time at, at short notice
to come before the primary production select committee.
Um, we've got, uh, 20 minutes, so,
um, far away and there'll be plenty of questions.
Thank you for the invite.
I'm Mike Ingle, the Commissioner North,
and Andrew Spelman's with me, uh, both
of us assisting me leading the response to the Hornet.
Just give a bit of a brief update,
if I may, just in terms of that.
And just first off, the intent that we have at the moment is
to eradicate Vesper Tini from New Zealand
through coordinated surveillance, nest construction
and community engagement.
At this stage, we have over 120 staff
and contractors deployed, uh, to the response
and the current situation.
Uh, as of last night, uh,
and a brief update at nine o'clock this morning,
the confirmed specimens we have is eight,
which is seven queens
and one male all from within the sort of glenfield area.
And there's also been, uh, sign off
of it being the hornet being an unwanted organism.
And we got that signed off through Andrew, the CTO on 11th,
uh, of 11th 25.
To date, we've got 182 traps
deployed, uh, within the region.
And we also yesterday deployed protein traps.
Uh, and we can probably comment the reasoning for that
and the difference between carbohydrate
and protein at this time.
Uh, we've also started intensive ground surveys, uh,
over 15 staff focusing on 277 properties at this stage
to do a more enhanced, uh, surveillance.
To date, we've had over 2,500 reports from the public,
which is, uh, exceptional, uh, both in terms of pictures,
phoning and et cetera, uh, across the piece.
And I think from my point of view,
we're in a really good space.
We've responded quickly.
There's a governing GIA partnership governance been set up
alongside KVH Horticulture New Zealand,
and we've also agreed with them
that the beekeeping industry will, will join
that meeting on Friday.
I've been, uh, meeting with them separately at this stage,
so they will come onto that governance structure separately,
the technical advisory group,
which got expertise from New Zealand, but also from the uk.
And we've also got someone in that that dealt
with the French, uh, incursion of hornets.
So that's, he's based in working in New Zealand now, so
that's been really helpful as well.
So the technical advisory group met this week.
So we do have sort of next steps.
Uh, we've engaged with obviously local councils, uh,
local board members, uh, Northland, uh, council as well, uh,
to make sure that the next three months in terms
of our strategy and plan is based on scientific
and technical advice,
but also to make sure that the staff are out there.
We've been learned a bit like fruit fly local markets, uh,
engaging in the communities around local businesses.
We've done further intelligence reports on any transitional
facilities in the area.
But the main point at the moment is to go hard
and early, uh, particularly at this time for the queens
who are still building the nest, uh, probably
for the next 46 weeks, depending on weather.
And that's when the worker bees, uh, welcome,
come into the, uh, nest.
And again, there's different strategies to deploy.
They are including.
Thank you very much. Alright,
we'll go straight into questions. We'll
Start with Joe. Thank
you. Um, thanks for your time this morning.
I've got a few questions, so I'm just gonna run them all
off at once if that's okay.
So first of all, I'm going to know when you were first, uh,
aware that we had this species here and what, uh, you did
or what was done as soon as you were made aware, um,
you talked about technology,
so you're talking about the transmitters
that will attach to them.
How quickly can that be done
and where are you at with that in particular?
Um, and have you, are they still,
was any testing being done is my last question to, um,
ensure that they're still from that same family, if
that's the right wording for it
and not, um, different speaking groups?
Yeah, so I'll take them. Oh, right.
Well, at time, if that's okay.
The, the first confirmed
through the lab was the 24th of June.
That was a male detection.
Uh, there was an incursion investigation done, uh,
visually surrounding the area, uh,
because it was a male at that point
and there was no evidence of any establishment.
And the fact that it was a alone male hitchhiker, uh,
that was the first one on the 24th of June, particularly
with the breed that the males die off
during that, that season.
The second one male was a photograph on the 4th of July,
but the team then looked at, well,
we've had a hitchhiker one in the 24th of June,
and then the other one in 4th of July.
That's when they escalated it, uh, from that point.
And we made sure that we then went out to industry,
we sent a briefing to industry, et cetera,
and formed a minister at that point, uh, from the,
I'll answer the technology one and then come back.
The technology one, we've got advice from the technical, uh,
technology advisory group, sorry, technical advisory group.
We are bringing across someone from the UK
that deployed this technology over the next week
or so to support us.
We will be in a position to deploy
that it's particularly effective once the male, the male,
uh, hornets are out
and building the wider nest in terms of the worker.
So again, within the timeline, we're in a good space to have
that, uh, technology deployed that we will obviously have
to go through governance 'cause that's our structure
with geo governance, but we're already planning for that.
We've already engaged both the supplier of the technology
and indeed bringing the, the UK across.
And the third question, apologies.
Um, and they still, uh, the testing from that stage,
So up until this stage we've had four back confirmed.
I'm just waiting for another genetic analysis,
which suggests, now this is not a hundred percent no,
it's always with genetic,
but it's felt that all all those four at this stage
came from the one nest.
So I have a supplementary, so the first one in June,
and then the second one in July, um,
the first one in June was a
hitchhiker. Is that what you're saying?
At the time? From an assessment done with one,
one male founder, that was what an analysis suggested.
Then you have another one in July.
How much, let's say that there was more
that you obviously weren't aware of in that time.
What can happen as far as breeding goes
with queens and stuff is,
So the queens would be hibernating at that point at time.
And so the sort of male die off during that period.
The queens then find a place to potentially nest in.
And if just a piece of dog build a nest at that point,
they'll borrow a wood or whatever
and get themself a, a warm space until then. Okay.
So they're not actually laying That's
Okay Because I'm,
I'm just trying to understand you, you,
you now saying it's not a alone male hitchhiker.
It's come from a queen in New Zealand.
So, so presumably the queen's been here
for some significant period of time.
So the technical advice at the moment,
looking at the genetics that is possible
that this has been over a year, right?
That's what we're saying. But at the time when we found the
first male, obviously as we've come on to October,
did the genetic analysis, that's what's shown its potential.
However, some of the expertise are still saying it could
still be possible that it's other hitchhiker.
But bear in mind what we've found thus far with some nests
and stuff, the, the, the,
the view at this stage is potentially,
it's over, it's a yearly cycle.
So, so in the eight queens you've found, is
that consistent with perhaps the incursion
of one queen a year ago?
So it's seven queens. Seven queens.
Seven queens, and one male.
So that first male was included in
that from 2020 4th of June.
Yeah. Can
I have a supplementary Mr Chair,
Uh, Joe, And then you Yep, yep. Yeah,
Right. Uh, sorry. So
seven queens.
Um, and you are concentrating in on the area
that they have been cited, uh, predominantly
how far can those queens actually travel and why, um,
Establishing, Yeah, like what are the plans
for broadening that area, um, for me,
educational programs outside of the current area
that you are in, because this is,
this could be quite catastrophic.
Absolutely agree. Could I just, just pass
around May help in terms of the, the map,
to answer the first question in terms
of evidence from the technical advisory groups,
generally at this time of the year,
the ma the females would travel one to two kilometers.
This time, however, they have been knowing
to fly greater distances than all the time, all time.
So whether it's between 10
and 15, there's different evidence out there depending on
temperatures, et cetera.
That's why we took a real belt
and base approach in terms of the amount of traps
that we flooded into that area,
particularly just now over the next three to four weeks,
since October, while the queens are building the nest
to get ground surveillance, public messaging out in terms
of the expertise from across the world.
That's what's exactly needed at this point.
We have got plans over the next three to four weeks
to extend the zone and put further traps out.
We're just waiting for that further technical evidence,
the carbohydrate based traps, which are designed
because the queens are building the nest
to go and get extra food.
There's obviously other food sources within the area that,
so it's getting that balance right of the timing
of the protein traps.
And that's why even
although technical advice could be
that you don't put protein traps out till the worker beers
are there, we made that decision
to get the protein traps out.
Now, just in case, whether it's weather climate,
this is the first time we've had them here.
So modeling is from the Europe and, and, and, and,
and from the far east.
So that's why we've put the protein traps particularly in
p uh, the, the area where most of the nests have been found.
We've put, uh, protein traps in there just
to get ahead of it again.
And then we've got a further plan to either extend it, uh,
probably up to five kilometers that's yet to be decided,
but that's where we think the next stages will be over
the next three to four weeks. Thank
You. Mark, you had
a sup and then a, uh, a main question.
Yeah, well, yeah, it is a supplementary on the, on back
of Steve Abels, Mr.
Chair, if I can. Yep, yep.
I interested to know about gene sequencing and breeding.
Steve Abel mentioned the word breeding,
and I'm interested in gene sequencing
because we have other species of hornets here in New Zealand
and the breeding cycle is b basically kicking off now
big time with the warm weather.
Do you, and have you done any gene sequencing on these
things, knowing full well that we have paper wasps
and Asian wasps and or hornets in New Zealand
and the morphology might be similar, so much so
that you get into breeding
and then the problems just gone mad?
Yeah, good question. We, we've got a technical report
that was designed and
that modeling was done based on Europe,
and then mapping that across to our climate
and the space, also engaging
with our bee industry partners in terms of wasps and bees
and, and making sure that any, any synergies between that,
that, again, as per that evidence at the moment,
it's considered that going into the end of November,
December would be the time that the worker bees come out.
But we're not just relying on that.
That's why we've put protein traps out just now.
Why we've enhanced the ground surveillance.
We've put additional staff out just now.
We've put more Facebook messaging, public messaging, flyers
around markets, engaging with local beekeepers in that area
as well as the National Bee Association to make sure
that public messaging
and making sure that people are notifying us
of the vast majority
of the notifications are either coming back as paper wasps
or, or German wasp or whatever, and the same in the process.
So we've gotta continue to do that.
We've all, we've all sequence the,
the other ones we've found,
and that's in the process at the moment.
And then we'll take technical advice
and then we'll make decisions.
Our plan is very flexible.
We've got sufficient, uh, staff, technical staff.
We've also got fantastic support in terms
of local volunteers, beekeepers, if we need that, as well
as our contracted staff, same as we've used, similar
to in any the successful eradication
of fruit fly early on in the year.
Joe, are you considering, like, uh, you said social media
and things like that, are you considering any television
advertising around this given that, you know,
older people perhaps might watch the news
or, you know, around that time of day?
Are you thinking about that
as a campaign as well? Yeah, we've
Not went out advertisements yet.
That's something that we would consider.
What we've done is there has been a lot of media interest,
uh, in that in terms
of both live breakfast television this week we've had
interviews, uh, obviously our, our wider known, uh,
media outlets, uh, both in terms
of intranet and the wider ones.
I've probably done, I dunno,
about 18 interviews over the last, uh, 12,
12 days in that space.
But again, we'll continue
to consider if there's anything extra we can do to get
that public messaging out.
Thank you. Um, mark,
You had a question?
No, no, no. Mr. Chair, it's actually been answered.
Well, actually, no, I, I might circle back,
sir, with the greatest respect.
Um, and thanks Mr. Chair.
Can you, can you elucidate a little further?
Are you saying that at, at where you are currently, you,
you are, are less concerned about interspecies
breeding given that that the, the nature of paper wasps,
Asian hornets, et cetera, that are here,
do not have the genetic disposition
that could be shared across,
into this yellow legged hornets thing
and in other words, then we have a runaway problem.
Uh, you know, you don't know or you don't
No, no, yes. At
this stage, however, we've asked
for further from the technical advisory group in terms
of the feasibility and the possibility of that.
So that is work that, that
as we have questioned the technical advisory group
to give us further further evidence.
Okay, thank you. We'll go to Rachel now.
Yep. Thank you. Um, thank you chair.
Uh, I just wanna take a different line of questioning.
I've, um, had an email from a,
a beekeeper about the bait used
and, um, so just quite keen
to get more understanding about the bait that's been used
that he suggested to me that it was the wrong type
of bait had been used.
So I, I don't have any more details other than what he said.
So you've mentioned already about carbohydrate
and protein, um, based vape.
So just be useful to get a little bit more detail on
the vape that you've used, why you've used it, what sort
of scientific advice you're following. Yeah,
Yeah, absolutely. So
at, at the moment, the vast majority
of the 182 traps are carbohydrate based.
So it's a mixture of sugars, a mixture of, uh,
to attract in terms of the, the, the queen to common feed
to build up those carbohydrate sources.
So that's the majority of them.
The protein one is basically a mixture of food,
could be chicken or fish to then attract to worker bees.
There is a separate process which includes, uh,
a poison within those traps.
We've not deployed them yet
because again, that next stage is vitally important.
So there's a whole range of conditions that we need to go
through, both in terms of local
councils, et cetera, to do that.
But at this stage, it's a food source traps for the queen
to come and feed to give her energy.
And then also we've started to probably ahead
of the curve is put some protein based traps out in case
there's any meals that are coming early.
Bear in mind, our modeling, as I said
before, that then attracts the meals to go in in terms
of those protein-based traps.
The poison aspect of it will be continued to be worked
through, and then we'll make a decision
based on when we deploy them. Okay.
Just, um, the other, the other issue that was raised
with me was around the number of traps,
whether there were enough and yeah, just some there,
Yeah, at this stage we, we
absolutely confident there's enough traps in that area.
Yeah, we're confident through the notifications
that we've got, good interaction from members
of public throughout the country in that space.
What the next phase is, is potentially going out
to five kilometers.
People talk, if I may, just about a buffer zone.
That's some of the language that's being used.
Our buffer zone at the moment is going out width to
that two kilometer zone.
If you can see at the moment,
we're doing enhanced surveillance.
So even although we've found them,
but then over the next day or so,
and across the piece,
we'll make decisions based based on do we go out
to five kilometers
and just as an example, that will then increase the,
depending on the, the, the technical advice.
At the moment, they're reach 250 meters apart,
and at that phase that would be another 700 traps.
So we want to make sure
that we get this right in terms of the timing of it.
But again, the,
the focus just now is on the trapping at the moment.
The staff on the ground
with the technical expertise doing enhanced ground
surveillance as well as continued public messaging.
Sorry, one quick step. What's the best way,
so if we do have questions, nature,
'cause I realize that obviously you're in the midst
of responding, so we don't wanna be, um, bombarding you
with questions, but, um, what's the best way for us
to get answers when we go get, um, people, you know, members
of the public coming to us as mps just raising concerns.
Um, what's the best way for us to sort
of escalate those? Well,
We are obviously, obviously more than happy
because listen, let's be frank here in terms of a concern,
it's a hornet slightly different from Fruit Fly.
We are more than happy to provide the
information that you require.
There is a process to go through.
We're getting a, a number of, of questions just now
that we're answering to a number of emails.
We're answering them very, very quickly on the right time.
So again, through our, our, our usual route,
through our ministerial services
or indeed through directly to, to MPI,
then we'll answer those questions that you have. Okay.
I'll just have a sip on that.
Do you have a FAQ on your website or something?
We can provide documents and, and, and give a document.
So I, uh, I've given you a brief overview
of present position here.
Any questions that we feel that's come from here
that we need to come back in more
detail, then we'll provide something. Yeah.
We're providing updates on the website,
fact sheets on the website.
Oh, those things. Excellent. Yep.
Um, Steve? Yeah, I mean, I, I just wanna say that it seems
concerning if they've got a flight, uh, capability
of over 10 kilometers or even 15
or 18, I heard then it would seem necessary to increase
that buffer zone that's even taking in their flight zone.
But I wonder with this high level of community interest
and concern participation
or really, um, what is the value
of community built traps?
Mm-hmm. 'cause traps can be rid relatively easily
constructed by members of the community,
and you could massively amplify the number
of traps out there by
encouraging participation of the public.
Yeah. Um, is, what is the downside to that?
Or would you encourage that?
Yeah, I would in, in terms of being asked that,
and we've put that on our website too in terms of,
certainly not gonna say, not to put traps out in terms
of the ingredients for the traps are out there and welcome.
And you can see that throughout.
So, yeah, that, that the major, that those, uh, engagements
through public engagements,
through our social media across the piece will allow much
more traps to be in place than they are.
The only risk to it is making sure that we're balancing
that with the bycatch.
So if those carbohydrate traps in particular
can attract bees as well.
Yeah. Well, we're not finding that
with our traps at the moment.
It's very small numbers of bees and, and, and worse.
So again, the, the more active involvement we have,
bear in mind your question round about the
potential flight path, the better. Yeah.
Kind of. Yeah. Yeah.
I mean, obviously I guess in this instance,
if a few bees are dying in the process
of wiping out a thing, it's a threat to all
of the bees in the country, then it's probably
worth the sacrifice.
Agree. Um, the, the, um, when a hornet is caught,
it isn't correct that they're a very strong flyer.
That if you, if they're kept alive,
they can then potentially be tracked back to the queen. Mm,
That's correct. That's
the next stage of the technology
that, that we're looking at.
If you can get tracking advice on, there is traps
that we will deploy that allows you, it's based on chilled,
uh, aspects, which sort of freezes 'em for a period.
You can then attach the transmitter
and what happens is then you then track them back
to the larger nest that will be built over December,
January, February, to then track them back
and then you destroy the nests. So
At the moment, we're looking for the primary nest from
McQue, whereas into the next phase, once you start
to see the workers or the mayor,
that's when you have the opportunity to trace them back
to the secondary nest, which is the much larger nest. Yep.
So I want final one, Mr. Chair. Yeah.
Um, are you as NPI or as biosecurity?
Um, happy to be part of public meetings,
uh, to inform the public on the North Shore what's going on
and what they can do to support.
Yep. 'cause I think there would be a, a high appetite for
that and it would increase the
impact that you're trying to have.
So I was up at the local board,
met the new board, uh, the chair.
The chair now was the deputy chair during fruit fly.
I've offered to attend any public meeting personally
right across the piece.
Also arborists, uh, it was on calls with 'em,
it set a webinar required.
So I, I'm happy to front up any, any public or
or whatever else we've been at the markets with the staff.
I've also been up I there
and again, from a local board
point of view, I have offered that.
Well, I'll take you up on that.
Danielle knows that. Maureen has a final question.
Um, how did it get here?
Again, looking back as a hitchhiker pest, potentially
not knowing at this stage, genetics, whether it's Europe or
or South Asia, we've got a, a route in through cargo.
'cause it could survive in terms
of if it was a queen coming in,
bear in mind if it was a queen coming in,
either use car vehicles,
potentially new car vehicles or containers.
There's also the possibility that one flew into someone's
jumper or something who were jumping on a plane, et cetera.
So that route back, we'll continue to track back.
That's why we go and do an assessment
of all the transitional facilities in the area, the type
of goods that they've brought in over
the last year and do that.
But at this stage,
because it's a resilient pest, a bit like BMSB
and other stuff, then there's a potential
through cargo use vehicles, new vehicles,
or potentially passengers.
Uh, well thanks very much.
Um, we've come to time, but um, anything we can do
to assist you, um, let us know.
We're obviously a bit concerned that it could become
endemic, which is what we don't want.
Absolutely. Um, thanks very much.
I'll just leave a bit of a fact sheet
There. Fact
Facebook too, which may answer some of the questions.
Thank you. Thank you for your time.
Thank you. My name Darren, this is,
we, she.